In this notebook, you'll be implementing an auto encoder with convolutional layers.
Convolutional layers are meant to work with spatial data like images.
Where we saw some blurriness and small noise
in our simple auto encoder reconstructed images,
I'm hoping to get a little better performance here.
So, just like last time,
we're just importing our packages and modules and getting the MNIST data.
Right here, I'm just taking a quick look at
our data to make sure it looks like what I expect.
Next up, let's define a convolutional autoencoder.
Here's a diagram of what our network is going to look like.
This is essentially going from input to output.
The diagram is really turned on its head from what you've seen before,
so that the input is at the bottom and the output at the top.
So, each of these horizontal bars represents a layer in this autoencoder
and the width of the bar indicates how large in the x and y dimension this layer is.
So, we're starting with an original image and that's just 28 by 28 by 1.
So, this is our input layer and then we have
a convolutional layer that increases the depth to 16.
So, we're left with a convolutional layer that has dimensions 28 by 28 by 16.
This layer is not changing the width or the height
but we're changing the depth from one to 16.
Next, there's a max pooling layer.
Our typical max pooling layer with a stride and kernel size of two will down-sample
the input such that the x and y dimensions are reduced by a factor of two.
So, in this case, we're going from 28 by 28 to 14 by 14 and the depth stays the same.
Along these same lines,
we have another convolutional layer that's 14 by 14 by 4.
In this case, we're reducing the depth from 16 to four
in the interest of making a better compressed representation.
Finally, one more max pooling layer which brings us to
a compressed representation that 7 by 7 by 4 in dimension.
This representation contains 196 values
total which is just 25 percent the size of our initial input.
A pretty good size reduction.
Though you could add another layer and go even smaller if you want.
So, this completes the encoder part and then we proceed to the decoder.
The decoder's main job is to go from a 7 by 7 by
4 compressed representation back to the size of the reconstructed output image.
Our goal is to get the reconstruction and the original image as close as possible.
There are basically two ways to do this using what are called
transposed convolutional layers or upsampling
and with some scaling and interpolation technique,
and I'll show you examples of both approaches.
So, first, we're going to try transposed convolutional layers.
With transposed convolution, there's
a kernel in this layer that's looking at the layer below.
Using a larger stride to multiply
existing pixel values by some weights and increase the spatial size of the output.
In this case, we'll be using
transpose convolutions with the kernel size and a stride of two,
so that they doubled the x and y dimensions of the input that they see.
You can think of them as doing both a convolution and on pooling operation at once.
You can read more about this behavior here and in fact,
PyTorch has some pretty good documentation on Convtransposed2D.
If we look at the documentation,
we can see that we can define
a transpose convolutional layer in the same way that we define convolutional layers.
It takes in a number of in-channels,
out-channels and a kernel size.
We'll also have to be careful to define the stride.
Okay, so following our diagram,
I want you to complete the class convautoencoder.
I've left most of this for you to fill in,
but I have shown you how to define a transpose convolutional layer.
This particular layer sees four inputs and produces 16 outputs.
It also has a kernel size of two and a stride of two,
so we'll upsample the spatial dimensions of anything it sees by a factor of two.
Later, when we get to training,
you'll see the same loss and optimization functions as in the simple autoencoder case.
Now, this model has more parameters so I'd advise training for fewer epochs at first.
Especially if you're just trying to see how the loss decreases over time.
Then, when you think you have a good model,
you should train it for around 20 or 30 epochs at least,
and then you can test it out on our usual test data.
Next, if you want to check your work or see a potential solution to this task,
you're welcome to check out my solution video.